U2 Tops Forbes List of Highest Paid Musicians Forbes magazine has released a new list of the 25 highest-paid musicians.  The numbers are based on income from May 2010 through May 2011, less tou...U2 Tops Forbes List of Highest Paid Musicians 



Forbes magazine has released a new list of the 25 highest-paid musicians.  The numbers are based on income from May 2010 through May 2011, less tour production costs and agent and manager fees.  U2 leads the pack with $195 million earned.  Rounding out the Top 10 in descending order are Bon Jovi ($125 million), Elton John ($100 million), Lady Gaga ($90 million), Michael Buble ($70 million), Paul McCartney ($67 million), Black Eyed Peas ($61 million), the Eagles ($60 million), Justin Bieber ($53 million) and the Dave Matthews Band ($51 million).



UK Police Foil Plot to Rob, Murder Joss Stone





Police in England have foiled a plot by two men who allegedly planned to rob and possibly murder singer Joss Stone.  Reports say the men were arrested on June 15 near Stone’s residence.  They were found with plans of her Devon home, swords and a body bag.  Joss released a statement that said, “I’d like to thank everyone for their concern, but I’m absolutely fine and getting on with life as normal while the police continue with their inquiries.”



Beverly Hills Auction House to Hold Music Icons Sale 





On June 25 and 26, Julien’s Auctions in Beverly Hills, California will hold a Music Icons sale.  Among the nearly 600 items to be auctioned is the autographed red and black leather jacket Michael Jackson wore in his “Thriller” video.  It’s expected to fetch a minimum of $200,00.  Also on the block is an Eric Clapton guitar, a pair of Frank Sinatra’s patent leather boots and his 1986 Jaguar, jackets and a guitar that belonged to Elvis Presley and a Bob Dylan autographed harmonica. 



New Musical to Highlight Susan Boyle's Life





Scottish singer Susan Boyle’s life story is being made into a stage musical.  “I Dreamed A Dream” will open at the Theatre Royal in Newcastle upon Tyne in 2012.  The touring show will run for at least six months in the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia.  Boyle said, “I never thought my life story would end up on the stage, but a lot has happened in two years and it is a very exciting prospect.”



New Album Releases June 21:



 “Planet Pit” by Pitbull

 “The Light of the Sun” by Jill Scott

 “Modern Love” by Matt Nathanson

 “Get Your Heart On!” by Simple Plan

 “A Family Business” by Brandy & Ray J

 “Alpocalypse” by Weird Al Yankovic

 “The Remedy” by Jagged Edge

 “Outlaws Like Me” by Justin Moore

 “Somewhere In California“ by Night Ranger

 “Gems: The Duets Collection” by Michael Bolton

 “Portraits: A Tribute To Great Women of Song” by Olivia Newton-John



Musical Events/Festivals/Benefits:





The Dave Matthews Band begins the first of its four “Caravan” festivals on June 24 in Atlantic City, New Jersey.  The lineup features more than 40 acts, including David Gray, Grace Potter & the Nocturnals, Damian Marley and Amos Lee.  The Dave Matthews Band’s future “Caravan” festivals will be held in Chicago, Illinois (July 8-10); New York City (August 26-28) and George, Washington (September 2 - 4).



The 2011 Montreal International Jazz Festival takes place June 25 - July 4.  The 32nd annual event will feature more than 1,000 concerts on outdoor and indoor stages.  The festival draws over two million music fans who gather in Montreal to hear 3,000 artists from 30 countries perform jazz, blues, Latin-jazz, Brazilian, Cuban, African, soul, reggae, electronic and other styles of music.  This year’s headliners include Prince, Diana Krall, Robert Plant, Peter Frampton, Youssou N’Dour, Madeleine Peyroux, Joshua Redman, Angelique Kidjo, and others.



On June 25, MTV will hold its “Video Music Aid Japan” charity show in Makuhari Messe, Japan.  Performers include Lady Gaga, Exile, Tokio Hotel, Marty Friedman and Girls’ Generation, among others.  Proceeds will benefit victims of the March 11 earthquake and tsunami in Japan.  MTV is broadcasting the show on MTV Japan, MTV Korea, MTV China and MTV Southeast Asia.  In addition, a one-hour special version will air worldwide on the channel’s weekly live music series, “MTV World Stage.”



Look Who's Going On Tour!





2010 American Idol winner Lee DeWyze recently wrapped up an Asian tour that took him to the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia.  June 19, he kicked off his first U.S. headlining tour in Columbus, Ohio.  The 25-year-old Illinois native is supporting his debut album, Live It Up.



On June 24, the 2011 Vans Warped Tour will begin in Dallas, Texas.  Headliners throughout the trek include Paramore, Gym Class Heroes, The Devil Wears Prada, A Day to Remember and Jack’s Mannequin, among others.  The tour will stop in 44 North American cities through August 14.



