American swimmer Michael Phelps has made history by winning his eighth gold medal at the Beijing Games, something no other athlete has ever achieved in the modern Olympics.Phelps and his teammates wo...American swimmer Michael Phelps has made history by winning his eighth gold medal at the Beijing Games, something no other athlete has ever achieved in the modern Olympics.



Phelps and his teammates won the men's 4x100-meter medley relay Sunday in a world record time of 3:29.34.  Since the modern Olympics started in 1896, no athlete had ever won eight gold medals at a single Games.  American Mark Spitz won seven medals in Munich in 1972. 



In other swimming events, Australia's women's team set a world record on its way to winning the 4x100-meter medley relay, in 3:52.69.



Germany's Britta Steffen edged 41-year-old American Dara Torres by 0.01 second to win the women's 50-meter freestyle event.  In the men's 1,500 meters freestyle race, Oussama Mellouli of Tunisia won the gold medal.



In track and field events Sunday, Shelly-Ann Fraser led a Jamaican sweep in the women's 100-meter gold medal with a time of 10.78 seconds.  



Romania's Constantina Tomescu won the women's marathon in 2:26:44.  



Three-time world champion Kenenisa Bekele of Ethiopia won gold as he successfully defended his Olympic men's 10,000 - meter title.  



Francoise Etone Mbango of Cameroon took gold in the women's triple jump, Gulnara Galkina-Samitova of Russia won the women's 3,000 meter steeplechase and Primoz Kozmus captured the gold in the men's hammer throw for Slovenia's first-ever Olympic track and field gold medal.  



Sandra Izbasa of Romania has pulled off a surprising upset to win the gymnastics gold medal in the women's floor exercise.  



World champion Shawn Johnson of the United States earned silver while her countrywoman Nastia Luikin won the bronze. 



Hong Un-Jong won North Korea's first Olympic gymnastics medal, shocking China's Cheng Fei to win the women's vault gold.  Zou Kai and Xiao Qin of China won gold in the men's floor exercise gold and pommel horse respectively.  



Russians swept the women's tennis medals with Elena Dementieva beating Dinara Safina in the gold medal match (3-6, 7-5, 6-3), while the bronze went to Vera Zvonareva.  



The Williams sisters, Venus and Serena of the United States, won the women's doubles gold for the second time.  



In men's tennis Wimbledon and French Open champion Rafael Nadal of Spain added the Olympic gold medal to his collection with a 6-3, 7-6, 6-3 win over Fernando Gonzalez of Chile.  It was Spain's first-ever Olympic tennis gold.  



China has won its fifth diving gold in five chances as Guo Jingjing won the women's three-meter springboard event.  Julia Pakhalina of Russia took the silver and Wu Minxia of China earned the bronze.



Rowing competition ended with the U.S. women winning the eights while Canada took the men's eights title.  The Dutch pair of Kirsten van der Kolk and Marit van Eupen beat Finland for gold in the women's lightweight doubles sculls, in 6:54.74. 



In the men's double sculls, Britain's Zac Purchase and Mark Hunter of Britain won the gold, in 6:10.99.  Denmark won the gold medal in the men's lightweight four.  Poland took the men's quadruple sculls gold while the women's quadruple sculls title went to China.



Britain has won the gold medal in the Olympic yngling (three person keelboat) ahead of the Netherlands and Greece.  Britain also won the Finn class (single-handed dinghy), as Ben Ainslie won his third Olympic title.  The gold medal in the men's 49er (two-person high performance dinghy) went to Denmark.  



In wrestling, five-time world champion Kaori Icho of Japan retained her title in the women's 63-kilogram event while China's Wang Jiao won the 72-kilo title.  China's Qiu Jian won the gold medal in the men's 50-meter three-position shooting event.  



Ilya Ilin took Kazakstan's first weightlifting gold medal in Beijing, winning the men's 94-kilogram title.



China defeated Singapore (9-11, 11-3, 11-8, 11-6) to win the women's team table tennis gold medal.  Lin Dan of China overpowered Lee Chong Wei of Malaysia to win the men's badminton singles gold, while Lee Hyo-jung and Lee Yong-dae teamed to give South Korea the mixed doubles badminton gold with a win over Indonesia - Liliyana Natsir and Nova Widianto.  



France defeated the United States to win fencing gold in men's team saber (45-37).



In cycling, Britain's Rebecca Romero claimed the gold in the women's individual pursuit track event (3:28.32).  With the win, Romero becomes the second woman and first Brit to win Olympic medals in two different sports.  



The United States leads in total medals with 65, 19 of them gold.  But host country China has the most gold medals, 35, in its total of 61.  Great Britain has the third most gold medals with 11 out of 25 overall. 

